Homer, Iliad

Credits: 
English and Greek: https://scaife.perseus.org/library/urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001/
Italian: E. Romagnoli

Greek: 
μῆνιν ἄειδε θεὰ Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος
οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρίʼ Ἀχαιοῖς ἄλγεʼ ἔθηκε,
πολλὰς δʼ ἰφθίμους ψυχὰς Ἄϊδι προΐαψεν
ἡρώων, αὐτοὺς δὲ ἑλώρια τεῦχε κύνεσσιν
οἰωνοῖσί τε πᾶσι, Διὸς δʼ ἐτελείετο βουλή,
ἐξ οὗ δὴ τὰ πρῶτα διαστήτην ἐρίσαντε
Ἀτρεΐδης τε ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν καὶ δῖος Ἀχιλλεύς.
τίς τʼ ἄρ σφωε θεῶν ἔριδι ξυνέηκε μάχεσθαι;
Λητοῦς καὶ Διὸς υἱός· ὃ γὰρ βασιλῆϊ χολωθεὶς
νοῦσον ἀνὰ στρατὸν ὄρσε κακήν, ὀλέκοντο δὲ λαοί,
οὕνεκα τὸν Χρύσην ἠτίμασεν ἀρητῆρα
Ἀτρεΐδης· ὃ γὰρ ἦλθε θοὰς ἐπὶ νῆας Ἀχαιῶν
λυσόμενός τε θύγατρα φέρων τʼ ἀπερείσιʼ ἄποινα,
στέμματʼ ἔχων ἐν χερσὶν ἑκηβόλου Ἀπόλλωνος
χρυσέῳ ἀνὰ σκήπτρῳ, καὶ λίσσετο πάντας Ἀχαιούς,
Ἀτρεΐδα δὲ μάλιστα δύω, κοσμήτορε λαῶν·
Ἀτρεΐδαι τε καὶ ἄλλοι ἐϋκνήμιδες Ἀχαιοί,
ὑμῖν μὲν θεοὶ δοῖεν Ὀλύμπια δώματʼ ἔχοντες
ἐκπέρσαι Πριάμοιο πόλιν, εὖ δʼ οἴκαδʼ ἱκέσθαι·

English (Murray):

The wrath sing, goddess, of Peleus' son, Achilles, that destructive wrath which brought countless woes upon the Achaeans, and sent forth to Hades many valiant souls of heroes, and made them themselves spoil for dogs and every bird; thus the plan of Zeus came to fulfillment,
from the time when first they parted in strife Atreus' son, king of men, and brilliant Achilles. Who then of the gods was it that brought these two together to contend? The son of Leto and Zeus; for he in anger against the king roused throughout the host an evil pestilence, and the people began to perish,
because upon the priest Chryses the son of Atreus had wrought dishonour. For he had come to the swift ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, bearing ransom past counting; and in his hands he held the wreaths of Apollo who strikes from afar,[*] on a staff of gold; and he implored all the Achaeans,
but most of all the two sons of Atreus, the marshallers of the people:
Sons of Atreus, and other well-greaved Achaeans, to you may the gods who have homes upon Olympus grant that you sack the city of Priam, and return safe to your homes; 

Italian: 

     Cantami l’ira, o Diva, d’Achille figliuol di Pelèo
funesta, che agli Achei fu causa di doglie infinite,
e molte alme d’eroi gagliardi travolse nell’Orco,
e i corpi abbandonò preda ai cani, banchetto agli augelli.
Ebbe così compimento di Giove Croníde il volere,
dal dí che furon prima divisi da un’aspra contesa
l’Atríde re, signore di genti, ed Achille divino.
Quale or dei Numi alla lite li spinse, alla zuffa? Di Giove
fu, di Latona il figlio. Crucciato col re, su le schiere
un morbo ei suscitò maligno, e perivan le genti,
perché l’Atride aveva lanciato l’oltraggio su Crise,
suo sacerdote. Costui, degli Achivi alle rapide navi
giunto era, a riscattare sua figlia; ed innumeri doni
recava, e in man le bende d’Apollo che lungi saetta,
sopra lo scettro d’oro. E tutti pregava gli Achivi,
e piú di tutti i due figli d’Atrèo, conduttori di genti:
«Atrídi, e tutti voi, Achei da le belle gambiere,
possano a voi concedere i Numi ch’àn sede in Olimpo
che la città prendiate di Priamo, ed in patria torniate.


