Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 1.1-1.3

Credits: https://scaife.perseus.org/library/urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0003.tlg001/

Greek: 

Θουκυδίδης Ἀθηναῖος ξυνέγραψε τὸν πόλεμον τῶν Πελοποννησίων καὶ Ἀθηναίων, ὡς ἐπολέμησαν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, ἀρξάμενος εὐθὺς καθισταμένου καὶ ἐλπίσας μέγαν τε ἔσεσθαι καὶ ἀξιολογώτατον τῶν προγεγενημένων, τεκμαιρόμενος ὅτι ἀκμάζοντές τε ᾖσαν ἐς αὐτὸν ἀμφότεροι παρασκευῇ τῇ πάσῃ καὶ τὸ ἄλλο Ἑλληνικὸν ὁρῶν ξυνιστάμενον πρὸς ἑκατέρους, τὸ μὲν εὐθύς, τὸ δὲ καὶ διανοούμενον.
κίνησις γὰρ αὕτη μεγίστη δὴ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἐγένετο καὶ μέρει τινὶ τῶν βαρβάρων, ὡς δὲ εἰπεῖν καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἀνθρώπων.
τὰ γὰρ πρὸ αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ ἔτι παλαίτερα σαφῶς μὲν εὑρεῖν διὰ χρόνου πλῆθος ἀδύνατα ἦν, ἐκ δὲ τεκμηρίων ὧν ἐπὶ μακρότατον σκοποῦντί μοι πιστεῦσαι ξυμβαίνει οὐ μεγάλα νομίζω γενέσθαι οὔτε κατὰ τοὺς πολέμους οὔτε ἐς τὰ ἄλλα.

English (Hobbes):

Thucydides, an Athenian, wrote the war of the Peloponnesians and the Athenians as they warred against each other, beginning to write as soon as the war was on foot, with expectation it should prove a great one and most worthy the relation of all that had been before it; conjecturing so much both from this, that they flourished on both sides in all manner of provision, and also because he saw the rest of Greece siding with the one or the other faction, some then presently and some intending so to do.
For this was certainly the greatest commotion that ever happened among the Grecians, reaching also to part of the barbarians and, as a man may say, to most nations.
For the actions that preceded this and those again that are yet more ancient, though the truth of them through length of time cannot by any means clearly be discovered, yet for any argument that, looking into times far past, I have yet light on to persuade me, I do not think they have been very great, either for matter of war or otherwise.

English (Jowett):

THUCYDIDES, an Athenian, wrote the history of the war in which the Peloponnesians and the Athenians fought against one another. He began to write when they first took up arms, believing that it would be great and memorable above any previous war. For he argued that both states were then at the full height of their military power, and he saw the rest of the Hellenes either siding or intending to side with one or other of them.
No movement ever stirred Hellas more deeply than this; it was shared by many of the Barbarians, and might be said even to affect the world at large.
The character of the events which preceded, whether immediately or in more remote antiquity, owing to the lapse of time cannot be made out with certainty.[*] But, judging from the evidence which I am able to trust after most careful enquiry[*], I should imagine that former ages were not great either in their wars or in anything else.

French (Zévort):

I. L’Athénien Thucydide a écrit l’histoire de la guerre entre les Péloponnésiens et les Athéniens et suivi toutes les phases de cette lutte. Il a commencé son œuvre au début même des hostilités, prévoyant dès lors combien cette guerre serait importante, combien plus mémorable que celles qui avaient précédé : il en avait pour preuve les immenses ressources de tout genre avec lesquelles les deux peuples allaient s’entre-choquer, et les dispositions des autres États de la Grèce qu’il voyait ou prendre parti immédiatement, ou méditer dès lors de le faire. C’est là, en effet, le plus vaste mouvement qui jamais se soit produit chez les Grecs ; il embrassa une partie des barbares, et ébranla pour ainsi dire au loin l’univers. Les événements qui ont immédiatement précédé et ceux qui appartiennent à une époque plus reculée ne pouvaient, dans l’éloignement, être exactement connus ; toutefois, à en croire des indices qui m’ont paru certains, et après avoir pousse mes investigations le plus loin possible dans le passé, je ne pense pas que ces événements aient offert rien de bien remarquable, ni sous le rapport militaire, ni sous aucun autre.





